.TH VNSTATD 8 "JANUARY 2022" "version 2.9" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
vnstatd \- daemon based database updating for vnStat

.SH SYNOPSIS

.B vnstatd
.RB [ \-Ddnpstv? ]
.RB [ \-\-alwaysadd
.RI [ mode ]]
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-daemon ]
.RB [ \-\-debug ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR group ]
.RB [ \-\-group
.IR group ]
.RB [ \-\-help ]
.RB [ \-\-initdb ]
.RB [ \-\-noadd ]
.RB [ \-\-nodaemon ]
.RB [ \-\-pidfile
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-sync ]
.RB [ \-\-timestamp ]
.RB [ \-\-u
.IR user ]
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR user ]
.RB [ \-\-version ]

.SH DESCRIPTION

The purpose of
.B vnstatd
is to provide a flexible and robust way for updating the database that
.BR vnstat (1)
uses. The availability of each interface is automatically tracked which
removes the need for additional scripts to be implemented and called when
an interface comes online or goes offline.
.PP
.B vnstatd
is the command for starting the daemon. The daemon can either fork
itself to run as a background process or stay attached to the terminal.
It supports logging directly to terminal, to a user selectable file or
using syslog.
.PP
Once started, the daemon will read
.BR vnstat.conf (5)
if available and then check if there is a database present
in the database directory that has been specified in the configuration
file. By default, if no database is found, a database will be created
during startup with entries for all available interfaces excluding pseudo
interfaces lo, lo0 and sit0. This automatic database entry creation behaviour
can be disabled using the
.B --noadd
option. Alternatively, using the
.B --alwaysadd
option instructs the daemon to create new database entries whenever interfaces not
currently in the databases become visible.
.PP
The daemon will proceed to track the availability of monitored interfaces,
process the interface traffic statistics and write new values to the database
at a configured interval. As a result, the daemon ends up spending most
of the time sleeping between updates.
.PP
When the
.B UseUTC
configuration option isn't enabled, data is stored in the database using local
time based on the daemon's execution environment when the configuration option
isn't enabled. Any changes in the system clock or the system timezone
configuration will result in data being inserted according to the new local
time without any recalculation being done for already stored data. The daemon
and the database in essence aren't aware of the used timezone or possible
daylight saving time and cannot be configured to offset the timestamps to any
direction. If a system clock or system timezone change or daylight saving time
observation ending results in an already seen time period to repeat then the
existing database values get incremented with the new data.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.BI "--alwaysadd " [mode]
Enable automatic creation of new database entries for interfaces not currently in
the database even if the database file already exists when the daemon is started. New
database entries will also get created for new interfaces seen while the daemon is
running. Pseudo interfaces lo, lo0 and sit0 are always excluded from getting added.
Using the option without
.I mode
defined or with
.I mode
set to 1 will enable the feature. Setting
.I mode
to 0 will disable the feature. This command line option overrides the
.B AlwaysAddNewInterfaces
configuration option when used.

.TP
.BI "--config " file
Use
.I file
as configuration file instead of using automatic configuration file search
functionality.

.TP
.B "-d, --daemon"
Fork process to background and run as a daemon.

.TP
.B "-D, --debug"
Provide additional output for debug purposes. The process will stay
attached to the terminal for output.

.TP
.BI "-g, --group " group
Set daemon process group to
.I group
during startup.
.I group
can be either the name of the group or a numerical group id. This option
can only be used when the process is started as root.

.TP
.B "--initdb"
Create a new empty database without interface data and exit. If the database
already exists then access to it is only verified. The daemon will not stay
running when this option is used. This option cannot be used in combination with
.B "-d, --daemon"
or
.BR "-n, --nodaemon" .

.TP
.B "--noadd"
Disable the automatic creation of new database entries for all available
interfaces if the daemon is started with no database found or with a database
without any interfaces. The daemon will fail to start if this option is used when
the database contains no interfaces or doesn't exist. The daemon will create an
empty database if one doesn't already exist. Pseudo interfaces lo, lo0 and sit0
are always excluded from getting added regardless of this option.

.TP
.B "-n, --nodaemon"
Stay in foreground attached to the current terminal and start the update
process.

.TP
.BI "-p, --pidfile " file
Write the process id to
.I file
and use it for locking so that another instance of the daemon cannot
be started if the same
.I file
is specified. This option has no effect if used in combination with
.BR "-n, --nodaemon" .

.TP
.B "-s, --sync"
Synchronize internal counters in the database with interface
counters for all available interfaces before starting traffic monitoring.
Use this option if the traffic between the previous shutdown
and the current startup of the daemon needs to be ignored. This option
isn't required in normal use because the daemon will automatically synchronize
the internal counters after a system reboot, if enough time has passed
since the daemon was previously running or if the internal counters are
clearly out of sync.

.TP
.B "-t, --timestamp"
Add a timestamp to the beginning of every print from the daemon when
the process is running in the foreground attached to a terminal after having
been started with the
.B "-n, --nodaemon"
option.

.TP
.BI "-u, --user " user
Set daemon process user to
.I user
during startup.
.I user
can be either the login of the user or a numerical user id. This option
can only be used when the process is started as root.

.TP
.B "-v, --version"
Show current version of the daemon executable.

.TP
.B "-?, --help"
Show a command option summary.

.SH CONFIGURATION

The behaviour of the daemon is configured mainly using the configuration
keywords
.B "UpdateInterval, PollInterval"
and
.B SaveInterval
in the configuration file.

.PP
.B UpdateInterval
defines in seconds how often the interface data is fetched and updated.
This is similar to the run interval for alternative cron based updating.
However, the difference is that the data doesn't directly get written to disk
during updates.

.PP
.B PollInterval
defines in seconds how often the list of available interfaces is checked
for possible changes. The minimum value is 2 seconds and the maximum 60
seconds.
.B PollInterval
also defines the resolution for other intervals.

.PP
.B SaveInterval
defines in minutes how often cached interface data is written to disk.
A write can only occur during the updating of interface data. Therefore,
the value should be a multiple of
.B UpdateInterval
with a maximum value of 60 minutes.

.PP
The default values of
.B UpdateInterval
30,
.B SaveInterval
5 and
.B PollInterval
5 are usually suitable for most systems and provide a similar behaviour
as cron based updating does but with a better resolution for interface
changes and fast interfaces.

.PP
For embedded and/or low power systems more tuned configurations are possible.
In such cases if the interfaces are mostly static the
.B PollInterval
can be increased to around 10-30 seconds and
.B UpdateInterval
set to 60 seconds. Higher values up to 300 seconds are possible if the
interface speed is 10 Mbit or less.
.B SaveInterval
can be increased for example to 15, 30 or even 60 minutes depending on how
often the data needs to be viewed.

.SH SIGNALS

The daemon is listening to signals
.B "SIGHUP, SIGINT"
and
.B SIGTERM.
Sending the
.B SIGHUP
signal to the daemon will cause cached data to be written to disk,
a rescan of the database directory and a reload of settings from the
configuration file. However, the pid file location will not be changed
even if it's configuration setting has been modified.

.PP
.B SIGTERM
and
.B SIGINT
signals will cause the daemon to write all cached data to disk and
then exit.

.SH FILES

.TP
.I /var/lib/vnstat/
Default database directory.

.TP
.I /etc/vnstat.conf
Config file that will be used unless
.I $HOME/.vnstatrc
exists. See the configuration chapter and
.BR vnstat.conf (5)
for more information.

.TP
.I /var/log/vnstat/vnstat.log
Log file that will be used if logging to file is enable and no other file
is specified in the config file.

.TP
.I /var/run/vnstat/vnstat.pid
File used for storing the process id when running as a background process and
if no other file is specified in the configuration file or using the command
line parameter.

.SH RESTRICTIONS

Updates need to be executed at least as often as it is possible for the interface
to generate enough traffic to overflow the kernel interface traffic counter. Otherwise,
it is possible that some traffic won't be seen. With 32-bit interface traffic counters,
the maximum time between two updates depends on how fast the interface can transfer 4 GiB.
Note that there is no guarantee that a 64-bit kernel has 64-bit interface traffic counters
for all interfaces. Calculated theoretical times are:
.RS
.TS
l l.
10 Mbit:        54 minutes
100 Mbit:        5 minutes
1000 Mbit:      30 seconds
.TE
.RE
Virtual and aliased interfaces cannot be monitored because the kernel doesn't
provide traffic information for that type of interfaces. Such interfaces are
usually named eth0:0, eth0:1, eth0:2 etc. where eth0 is the actual interface
being aliased.

.SH AUTHOR

Teemu Toivola <tst at iki dot fi>

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR vnstat (1),
.BR vnstati (1),
.BR vnstat.conf (5),
.BR signal (7)
